*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 69417 ***

[Illustration: FRONTISPIECE.

  _A. Thornthwaite invt._
  _Isaac Taylor ſculp._]


 _Where Severn, Trent, or Thames's Ouzy side
  Pours the smooth Current of their easy Tide,
  Each will require a sameneſs to the Spot,
  For this a Cell, a Cascade or a Grot;
  The Moſs, or gliding Streams productive Store,
  To grace the Building on the Verdant Shore,
  There the rough Tuscan, or the Rustic fix,
  Or Pebbles, Shells, or calcin'd Matter mix,
  The frozen Isicles resembled form,
  Or Sea-green Weed your Grotto must adorn._

                     Art of Architecture, _a Poem_.




                 GROTESQUE ARCHITECTURE;

                           OR,

                    _RURAL AMUSEMENT_:

                      CONSISTING OF
             PLANS, ELEVATIONS, AND SECTIONS,
                           FOR
      HUTS, RETREATS, SUMMER AND WINTER HERMITAGES,
                       TERMINARIES,
          _CHINESE, GOTHIC, AND NATURAL GROTTOS,_
      CASCADES, BATHS, MOSQUES, MORESQUE PAVILIONS,
      GROTESQUE AND RUSTIC SEATS, GREEN-HOUSES, &c.

           _Many of which may be executed with_
       Flints, Irregular Stones, Rude Branches, and
                     Roots of Trees.

                   THE WHOLE CONTAINING
                TWENTY-EIGHT NEW DESIGNS,
                   WITH SCALES TO EACH.

                    TO WHICH IS ADDED,
                    _AN EXPLANATION_,
            WITH THE METHOD OF EXECUTING THEM.


              By WILLIAM WRIGHTE, Architect.


                      A NEW EDITION.


                         LONDON:
 _Printed by W. Stratford, Crown-Court, Temple-Bar; for_
                        J. TAYLOR,
   AT THE ARCHITECTURAL LIBRARY, NO. 59, HIGH HOLBORN.

                          1815.




GROTESQUE ARCHITECTURE.


PLATE I.

Plan and elevation of a hut, to be built with trunks of trees and
irregular timber. The inside walls may be lined with moss, and covered
on the top with thatch. It is intended to represent the primitive state
of the Doric Order, and is proper to be placed at the entrance of a
wood, or on the top of a small eminence. The dimensions are figured on
the plan.


PLATE II.

Plan and elevation of an hermetic retreat, to be composed of roots and
irregular branches of trees, cemented together with a strong binding
clay, and may be thatched or covered with branches of trees twined round
with ivy. The dimensions are figured on the plan.


PLATE III.

Elevation of an hermit's cell, with rustic seats attached, eight feet
square in the inside, which should be situated in a rising wood near
some running water, to be built partly of large stones and trunks of
trees, set round with ivy, and lined with rushes, &c. The roof should be
covered with thatch, and the floor paved with small pebble stones or
cockle shells. The seats attached are intended to be composed of large
irregular stones, roots of trees, &c.


PLATE IV.

Plan and elevation for an hermitage, in the eastern style, supposed to
be built round a tree which supports its roof; over the door is a
tablet, with an Arabic inscription; the roof is covered with thatch, in
the Chinese taste; the inside to be lined with billet wood and moss. It
is lighted from the lanterns above. A. should be a couch; B. C. are
seats of retirement. The dimensions are figured in the plan. The rustic
seats on the side are intended to be composed of large rough stones and
roots of pollard trees cemented together.


PLATE V.

Plan and elevation of a winter hermitage, intended as a retirement from
hunting, fowling, or any other winter amusement; the walls to be built
of flints or rough stones, and lined with wood or other warm substance
intermixed with moss, and should be situated on a rising ground planted
with evergreens.


PLATE VI.

Plan and elevation of a summer hermitage, designed to be in a wilderness
or thick wood; the walls to be composed of large stones, and the ends
faced with flints; the roof covered with thatch, and an owl carved on
the top; the floor should be paved with sheeps marrow-bones placed
upright, or any other pretty devices intermixed with them. A. is for a
couch; B. C. are seats of retirement.


PLATE VII.

Plan and elevation of an hermitage in the Augustine style; the front is
ornamented with a portico of palm trees; in the pediment is a scull, and
a tablet with an inscription. A. A. are passages of evergreens leading
to the two circular retreats, one of which is intended as a library, and
the other a bath; the tops of them are intended to be thatched; b b b.
are niches for seats cut in the evergreens. This design is calculated to
be built on a small verdant amphitheatre, near a murmuring stream, and
as a proper retreat from the fatigues of a sultry day.


PLATE VIII.

A plan, half an elevation, and half a section, of a rural circular
hermitage, designed for an open situation near some rivulet, planted
with weeping willows, &c. The inside is lighted by a gazebo, supported
by eight trunks of trees twined about with ivy. The dimensions are
figured on the plan.


PLATE IX.

Plan, elevation, and section, of a grotto in a modern architectonic
style, ornamented with jet d'eaux, sea weeds, looking-glass, fountains,
and other grotesque decorations. The dimensions may be known by the
scale and the figures on the plan.


PLATE X.

Plan and elevation of a Gothic grotto, with four closets five feet
square; the outside to be composed of flints and irregular stones, and
studded with small pebbles; the inside to be ornamented with shells,
ores, &c. and if built upon an eminence, it would have a very pleasing
appearance.


PLATE XI.

Plan and elevation of an open Chinese grotto, to be placed at the head
of a grand canal, with a bath (A), and a Chinese temple (B), attached;
the arcades to be ice or frosted work; the outside of the bath and
temple to be ornamented with beautiful shells in the Mosaic taste; the
inside to be groined over, as on the plan, and ornamented with
shell-work and other beautiful incrustations. The whole extent is 75
feet.


PLATE XII.

Plan and measures to plate xiii. and xiv.


PLATE XIII.

Elevation of a Gothic grotto, with cascades and wings attached (_see the
plan, plate xii._) The entrance is a saloon of 20 feet square; the
angles are couped with off niches, where grotesque statues or vases
should be placed. It is intended to have a fountain in the centre, with
antique figures spouting out water; the walls should be lined with
flints, decorated with ice-work; the whole is lighted from a gazebo on
the top. A. B. are the plans of the two wings or repositories, which are
each descended to by a flight of four steps. A. is intended to be
ornamented with curious shells, gems, coral, &c. with statues in the
niches. B. is to be groined over in the Gothic manner, with a pier in
the centre to be lined with flints, intermixed with shells,
looking-glass, &c. The groins should be incrusted with frosted work, in
the manner of dropping icicles. Both these wings are lighted from the
rose arches, as appears in the elevation; the outside to be composed of
rough stones incrusted and studded with pebbles, shells, &c. There are
placed in the recesses Gothic figures. The situation should be in some
retired copse, shaded by an adjacent hill, near some murmuring rivulet,
where the cascades, or rather fountains, as in the design, may be easily
effected. The measures are marked on the plan.


PLATE XIV.

Elevation of a rural grotto (_see the plan, plate xii._) which should be
built of large rough stones rudely put together, so that the building
may as near as possible imitate the beautiful appearance of nature. If
the dome was to be richly ornamented with pendentive shell and frosted
work, it would look very elegant. In the middle niche is Neptune on a
rock, pouring out water, which descends under the pavement through an
arch, and forms a running stream. The side niches are ornamented with
satyrs and other grotesque figures. The situation should be in a morass,
near some water.


PLATE XV.

A design for a cascade or cataract of a great fall of water, decorated
with rock-work, sea lions pouring out fountains of water; and a triton
by way of embellishment, in the centre.


PLATE XVI.

A design for a triumphal cascade of four falls of water. If care is
taken to erect this arch with rude and irregular flints, &c. at the same
time paying a due observance to nature, it will have a very magnificent
appearance, and look extremely elegant; and would be a superb ornament
in a nobleman's park where there is a great supply of water.


PLATE XVII.

A grotto, canal, and cascade, decorated with rock-work, tritons, sybils,
&c. pouring forth fountains of water. The author hopes he may be
indulged with observing, that he hath with great pleasure seen a fine
piece of water in the park of the Earl of _Essex_, at _Cashiobury_, near
_Watford_, _Herts_, and flatters himself, that if the arch in this
design, on which the triton is placed, was to be executed there in the
nature of a bridge, it would have a very magnificent and pleasing
appearance.


PLATE XVIII.

A romantic bridge, or a cascade of three sheets of water, descending
through arches of artificial rock-work, incrusted with shells, corals,
sea-weed, moss, &c. and two sea gods lying on their oozy couch, pouring
out water.


PLATE XIX.

Plan and elevation of a rustic seat for a garden or park, intended to
terminate a view. It would look very pretty if it was built with flints,
or irregular rude branches and roots of trees.


PLATE XX.

Plan and elevation for a grotesque or rural bath, very proper to be
built in gardens, &c. for the benefit of bathing. It is intended to have
three seats within, by way of closets, for the convenience of dressing
and undressing. If the water in the plan be left out, it will look very
pleasing as a rural hut.


PLATE XXI.

Plan and elevation of a rural mosque with minarets. It is divided into
an octagon saloon, supported by eight columns, lighted from the dome.
The other apartments are four regular small rooms or closets, which will
serve for various purposes. The minarets are placed in the plan by way
of ornament, to shew the true taste of the Turkish buildings; and the
singularity of the style of architecture is such, that will render it a
very pleasing ornament, if executed in a pleasure ground, or upon an
elevated verdant amphitheatre. It may be built of wood, and stuccoed;
the inside should be painted with various rich colours, which would have
a pleasing and elegant appearance. The dome is supported by irregular
branches of trees, well connected and cramped together. The minarets
should be solid, and the pedestals (A. B.) should be decorated with
Arabic inscriptions. For a more intelligible and historical account of
these buildings, I must refer the reader to Dr. _Shaw's_ Account of
_Barbary_, _Le Brun_ and _Tournefort's_ Voyage to the _Levant_, &c.


PLATE XXII.

Plan and elevation of a circular mosque twenty feet diameter, with four
cabinets attached, eight feet square; two of which may serve for
entrances, having each a small fountain, five feet diameter; the other
two may be for the purposes of study or use. The four minarets at the
angles bring the plan upon the square of forty feet. The cabinets, as
well as the mosque, are crowned with domes, which should be gilt on the
outside. The great dome is supported by eight columns, over which are
groined arches; an iron balustrade runs round the outside, which may be
painted blue, and gilt; on the top of the great dome is a light cupola,
supported by eight small columns, from whence hangs a chandelier to
light the inside when required. The other decorations may be seen in the
section, plate xxiv.


PLATE XXIII.

Plan and elevation for another mosque, with two minarets attached to the
body of the building, which may be executed in brick of 14 inches
thickness. The front is a portico of four columns, in the oriental
style, in the centre of which is a fountain for sabateons; which may be
seen in the section, plate xxiv. The niches in the front should have
Arabic inscriptions in gold letters. The portico is covered with three
little domes, in the Turkish manner, ornamented with crescents, &c. The
inside is lighted from the circular windows and little arches above,
which support the dome. For the interior decoration, see the section,
plate xxiv. It would look very beautiful if built on an open lawn,
planted round with a few cypress or other exotic trees. The dimensions
are figured on the plan.


PLATE XXIV.

Sections and scales to plates xxii. and xxiii.


PLATE XXV.

Two plans of moresque temples to plates xxvi. and xxvii. with their
proper measures.


PLATE XXVI.

Elevation of a beautiful moresque temple (_see the plan, plate xxv._)
The coupled columns support an arcade of intersecting semi-ellipses,
which goes quite round the temple. In the spandrells are Moors heads,
with crescents, roses, and stars, over which is a parapet balustrade of
net or lattice-work. The body of the temple is 20 feet diameter, crowned
with an open lantern, from whence it is lighted; the outside of which is
adorned with stars of glass of an azure ground. On the top is a pine,
which should be double gilt; and if the outside was covered with a
glossy substance, it would have a very pleasing and magnificent
appearance. The style of architecture is a medium between the Chinese
and Gothic, having neither the levity of the former nor the gravity of
the latter. The particularities of both this and the following design
are taken from those famous remains of barbarian antiquity, the palace
of _Alhambra_, at _Granada_, the ancient moresque mosque at _Cordova_,
the old cassavee or palace of the _Moorish_ kings at _Mæquanez_; for the
accounts of which the reader is referred to _Willughbuy's_ Travels into
_Spain_, _Ockley's_ Account of South or West _Barbary_, and _Shaw's_
Travels to the _Levant_.


PLATE XXVII.

Elevation of a moresque pavilion (_see the plan, plate xxv._) in the
style of the ancient _Moors_, raised on three steps. Over the arches are
_Moors_ heads and festoons. In the middle is a circular or geometrical
staircase, leading to the top, or balustrade. It is crowned with a
square cupola, mounted with a moresque standard; and is very proper to
be built on an eminence to command an extensive view.


PLATE XXVIII.

Plan and elevation for a green-house of the grotesque kind, faced with
flints and irregular stones. The dimensions may be found by the scale.

       *       *       *       *       *

W. Stratford, Printer, Crown-Court, Temple-Bar.




[Illustration: _Plate 1._

  _A Primitive Hut._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 2._

  _Hermetic Retreat._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 3._

  _Hermit's Cell._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 4._

  _Oriental Hermitage._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 5._

  _Winter Hermitage_]


[Illustration: _Pl. 6._

  _Summer Hermitage_]


[Illustration: _Pl. 7._

  _Augustine Hermitage._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 8._

  _Rural Hermitage._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 9._

  _Modern Grotto._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 10._

  _Gothic Grotto._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 11._

  _Chinese Grotto._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 12._

  _Plan to Plate 13._
  _Plan to Plate 14._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 13._

  _Gothic Grotto, with Cascades & Wings Attached._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 14._

  _Rural Grotto._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 15._

  _A Cascade with Fountains_]


[Illustration: _Pl. 16._

  _Triumphal Cascade._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 17._

  _Grotto, Canal, & Cascade._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 18._

  _Romantic Arches, with Cascades._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 19._

  _Rustic Seat to Terminate a View._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 20._

  _Grotesque, or Rural Bath._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 21._

  _Rural Mosque with Minarets._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 22._

  _Circular Mosque with Cabinets Attached._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 23._

  _Turkish Mosque with Minarets Attached._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 24._

  _Section to Plate 22._
  _Section to Plate 23._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 25._

  _Plan to Plate 27._
  _Plan to Plate 26._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 26._

  _Moresque Temple._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 27._

  _Moresque Pavillion._]


[Illustration: _Pl. 28._

  _Green-house._]




Transcriber's Note

Inconsistent spelling (icicles/isicles, pavilion/pavillion) and
hyphenation (sea-weed/sea weed) retained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 69417 ***
